Yuri on Ice is a 2016 anime about Yuri Katsukai,
a 24 year old figure skater from Japan whose
pretty much convinced that he’s past his
prime. Until his idol, world famous Russian
figure Victor Nikiforov shows up in Yuri’s
small town to coach him into being a champion
himself.
I’ve been told for almost an entire year
that I need to watch Yuri On Ice. People on
YouTube. People on Twitter. People on Facebook.
All telling me I need to watch it. That I’d
love it, and that it’s super gay. When I
mentioned it to a few friends they were honestly
shocked I hasn’t seen it. So, finally, begrudgingly,
I watched it. Spoilers ahead.
And I want to be absolutely blunt, before
we get into this. I’ve made a kind of career
here on YouTube talking about queer coding
in media. How gay characters are almost never
shown, and just hinted at. And it’s incredibly
frustrating, queer coding that is. And I was
warned before watching Yuri on Ice that it
was total queer bait, but I watched it anyway.
And after watching both the sub’d and dub’d
versions, I can say that this is actually
the kind of representation that I’ve been
asking for. Could it have used an on-screen
kiss? I mean sure. The arm-in-front-of-mouth
felt a little forced when it’s abundantly
clear what was going on.
But… it didn’t really need two men kissing
in public. Because its queerness… wasn’t
subtle at all.
In fact the subtlety was lacking to such an
extent that it boggles my mind that there
are fans online who argue that Yuri and Victor
are straight.
Straight.
Yes.
Absolutely.
This is…
pique heterosexuality.
Granted, the English voice dub is much more
homosexually explicit, whereas the subtitled
version is less textual. Granted, a key component
of creative licence in Japanese media is for
the audience to take implicit details for
granted. So, in the culture of media consumption
in Japan, yes, those little gay cues are meant
to be read into.
Going through it three times total, the gay…ness
of the whole thing became so much more apparent
each time that the only way I can possibly
account for anyone saying that this is straight
is a bunch of women and girls who are exercising
the most willful ignorance I’ve had the
displeasure of being exposed to. Which, honestly,
if the complete lack of women in this sausage
fest isn’t a tip off, the literal only textual
antagonist in this first season is one who
refuses to stop shoving his heterosexual lifestyle
in everyone’s faces.
I can understand why a lot of North American
viewers wouldn’t get the message though.
There’s no grand, bombastic soapbox moment
where either Yuri or Victor stand in front
of a crowd to declare their sexuality… except
the scene where Yuri declares his love for
Victor on live TV. But besides that.
And neither was there a whole media push to
promote these gay characters, in which the
network and creator can pat themselves on
the back, Disney “first gay character”
style.
If a studio or network isn’t blasting their
own self-promotional circle-jerk across the
internet, how do we know for certain that
a character is gay? And even if they are gay,
how do we know it’s gay representation if
a giant, money-grubbing straight, family-values
corporation isn’t telling a swarm of queers
that this is gay representation? How gay is
gay enough for it to be gay… without us
having to be told it is?
Now, I know what you’re thinking. I’ve
spent most of my tenure on YouTube railing
against media producers for using copouts
when it comes to any kind of representation.
Using the whole ‘it’s there if you look
for it’ queer coding and baiting doesn’t
really fly with me in most cases.
But at some point, the question of ‘how
gay is gay enough’ must become ‘why do
we have to project our gay all the way to
the cheap seats in the back?’
How gay does something need to be for people
to appreciate it’s gayness?
Not even that. At what point are people gonna
stop telling gay people what is or isn’t
a gay experience?
Because you have something, Yuri!!! On ICE,
in which the story benefits from subtlety.
But apparently, we’re not allowed to have
nuanced depictions of gay experiences because
unless we’re showing up on a pride float
weraring a leather harness and puppy hood,
there’s a whole swath of people who will
insist we don’t exist.
The thing is… rubbing our sexuality in everyone’s
faces just to prove we exist does get exhausting
for us, and in order to prove our existence,
we get stuck in a cycle where our existence
is based solely on our sexuality and sex.
And so, our existence is deemed not appropriate
for all audiences.
Victor shouldn’t NEED to have Yuri bent
over a bench in order to justify and demonstrate
their sexual and romantic leanings when the
emotional simplicity is focused on a much
more wholesome depiction.
Mostly.
To the point where… yeah I think this is
better queer representation than the overwhelming
bulk of American films, television shows,
and even comic books have had to offer in
recent memory.
At which point before going on, I feel obliged
to erase any shadow of a doubt to confirm
that, yes, even through inference only, this
is qualifiabley gay — and maybe even queer
- representation.
To The Network’s credit, they did everything
they could to keep as much of the gay out
of Yuri!!! On ICE. From arms-in-front-of-kisses
to obscuring as much of the romantic details
as possible. There’s no plausible deniability
that there are a slew of gay characters in
this show… but it is possible. Not plausible,
but possible. Straights are great at that.
As I mentioned, Japanese media is meant to
be read into — where heavy-handed details
are generally frowned upon. What’s inferred
is meant to be taken for granted.  Both
Kristoff and Victor, almost naked, jumping
into Yuri’s bed in Barcelona itself is not
meant to be dismissed as a ‘just friends
thing.’ After all, we here in continental
America have a joke about male figure skaters
all being gay — I can’t imagine that there
isn’t that reputation elsewhere. I’m comfortable
saying that the show’s displays of affection
and romance are meant to co-incide with an
already-present expectation of male figure
skaters.
Because scenes like this, with no dialogue
contains a visual language which does not
need translation. Seriously… this scene
was basically lifted from a 2000s Kate Hudson
romance.
Personally, as a visual learner, and a film
director, I’m a little disappointed that
we are apparently so incapable of trusting
visual language here in the West. But that’s
a whole other video on its own.
Because the vast majority of queer content
in Yuri!!! On ICE is visual language.
I mean… we’ve been demanding to be seen,
right?
And if a gay person saying: “Hey, this is
a pretty gay experience” isn’t enough,
there’s more than enough textual evidence
to indicate that this is a cast of gay and
bi figure skaters.
Except for JJ. The straights can have him.
Because aside from the airport scene, the
engagement, and an overall comfort with nudity,
Victor and Yuri routinely share a bed.
And then there’s the repudiative public
almost-love declarations that are projected
at the public during broadcasts. I mean I
get that dismantling toxic masculinity involves
a process of making it acceptable to tell
your best bro that you love him, but there’s
a difference between wanting the best for
your bro and wanting to $#^% him.
The engagement scene, and it is an engagement
scene, is really the only part of the series
that I disliked. It just reads like a no-homo
copout that the network made the creators
slip in there. Probably as a compromise so
that they could have a gay engagement in the
first place.
But you also get a scene where two naked men
jump into Yuri’s bed and his only objection
is about how cold their feet are. Which maybe
you could argue this is a straight boy thing,
but then we’re getting desperately close
to the territory of staged straight-bait porn.
And couple that with the yearning, the pining,
the numerous confessions, the hand, holding,
the hugging, the emotional support crying,
the complete lack of female love interests.
And like. Sure. Take a couple of these things
and you can argue that it’s straight? If
you wanna be mean.
Why do you want the gays to have FEWER icons?
Jesus. We can still get fired for being gay
in most states, can you at least let us have
anime male figure skaters?
But add all of it together and it simply does
not fit the bill for plausible deniability.
And it’s not like Yuri and Victor are the
only queer ones—
The show makes it abundantly clear when a
figure skater has alleged heterosexual inclinations.
Also the… brother and sister who are…
very committed.
But as for other characters… is it possible
for catboys to be straight? [Yurio with the
ears.] No really, are there any straight catboys?
I’m curious.
Aside from joking around, I can’t really
think of any other excuse for why a 15 year
old, bereft of adult supervision, would so
vehemently flee a swarm of rabid fangirls
only to wind up riding bitch for a hunky slav.
Followed by this scene.
On a vista overlooking the sun setting and
everything. Come on.
What more does it have to take?
Why is it that not until boys are literally
putting their bodies together for skin-on-skin
contact that some people will insist that
this type of situation is completely hetero.
I’ve actually heard this is pretty bad for
sports anime.
At which point I consider it a failure of
Western ’queer representation’, where
Western audiences cannot recognize queer characters
by inference alone.
And so… one has to wonder… what is causing
this denial in media analysis? What makes
some American audiences require their media
to be so much more… explicit?
Subtlety as a staple of Japanese storytelling
extends not only to modern media but also
the mythological cycle, the very way in which
ancient Japanese historians recorded their
legends, and then re-recorded those documents.
Small gentures, like nods or turning one’s
head slightly, were recorded in detail, and
were meant to signify a clear, nonverbal message.
Which not only was used to characterize the
individuals in the story, whether fiction,
history, or fictionalized history, but to
explain and justify the actions of characters
or figures.
In many instances, a piece of media is meant
to be read into. This isn’t to say that
every piece of Japanese media is meant to
be subtle and deeply enriching.
But this does say that this is an audience
that has been conditioned to seek out smaller
inferences and put it into the context of
the work as a whole. An audience which is
conditioned to be aware that all aspects of
a given piece of fiction are placed there
deliberately by the creator, and therefore
are meant to ask why that is. And as a result,
in order to fully appreciate the media, you,
the observer, are invited to extract details.
That’s one of the reasons fandom culture
is so intense in Japan.
So… scenes which are implicitly romantic
in setting, emotional context, and body language
seem out of place in an anime which is seemingly
exclusively about figure skating. Why is that?
No really, would it not seem super weird to
dedicate so much time and energy to depicting
the ‘platonic’ relationship between a
figure skater and a coach in such a sensual
way in straight media? As far as implicit
gay content goes, Yuri!!! On ICE has the writing
written more clearly on the wall than some
explicit queer content.
Due to the complexity of the models and expressions,
there is greater permission for more of the
story and characters to exist in visual language.
Because visual language does not require a
translation, I’d also be willing to say
this is a significant reason for the growing
global popularity of Anime.
This is especially true when we factor in
an over-arching element of Japanese culture,
which is much more reserved when it comes
to public displays of affection — at least
next to America. And especially next to Switzerland.
However, as I mentioned, audiences conditioned
to expect American media to be very blunt
are at the same time more cynical, and unwilling
to read into the subtext of a given property.
The english voice-dub of Yuri!!! On ICE is
much more explicit in it’s depictions of
queerness — which matches the sensibilities
of audiences in Americanized nations. And
I’m not trying to say that one version of
Yuri!!! On ICE is better than the other. Honestly
the difference in translation is so subtle,
that it isn’t that noticeable. The instances
of visual language make up the bulk of queer
coding in either version.
American audiences though, are far more conditioned
to overt messaging. Cue another person who
thinks that Fightclub is a celebration of
toxic masculinity.
And I mean it’s not really our fault. Euro-American
media as a whole seems to be driven more and
more towards an elimination of nuance. Whether
that’s because of Hollywood or whether Hollywood
has been responding to and demand. But it
seems that American media has been edging
more and more towards a situation where the
audience is encouraged to do as little as
possible to engage with their media.
I hear stories about people going to movie
theatres in America, and am a little shocked
to hear just how… frequently people will
have whole conversations while a movie is
going on, or just be on their phone. I don’t
know how you guys function. Where I am, being
in a movie theatre is kinda… sacred. You’re
there to watch a movie, not to have a conversation.
And put your damn phone away.
Granted, this culture of movie-theatre discussions
go back to the beginning of movie theatres
in general, where people in city centres would
escape summer heat in cinemas — one of the
only structures at the time that was air-conditioned.
A necessity due the to flammability of early
nitrate based film.
And, as people weren’t necessarily paying
attention to what was on the screen, a film
would still be received negatively by movie
goers if they didn’t know what was going
on or if they didn’t pick up on certain
details. This lead to a trend in films to
reach for grand spectacles instead of nuanced
character dramas. Enter Cecil B Demill and
his biblical epics.
It wasn’t until the 60s that acting, plots,
and direction style shifted to a more natural,
humanistic level of expression. The film version
of ‘Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woof’ was
a marked shift in popular styles of filmmaking
towards a more subtle style of realistic nuance.
Coupled with the american culture of consuming
Television programming, and entertainment
was very much something that was there to
be on in the background while people went
about their lives. Repeating information to
make sure that the message got across. That’s
why so many TV shows actually repeat the last
bit of the last scene after a commercial break.
To this day.
And it wasn’t until recently in American
Television that shows were designed for you
to pick up on subtlety, with examples like
Arrested Development, the first few seasons
of Game of Thrones, and especially Breaking
Bad.
It may go deeper than Hollywood though. Compare
Japanese mythological storytelling conventions
to ‘western’ ones. Modern stories, in
one way or another, are always constructed
on the foundation of ancient mythological
cycles. For this, European stories were made
on a tradition stemming from Roman and Greek
poems, as well as Abrahamic parables.
In either case, the narrative convention of
these styles very much lean towards the explicit.
Dialogue is over-rought, clear in it’s delivery,
with the intention to convey complete meaning
in the spoken word alone. Though… it’s
really hit or miss with that. Turns out that
after 2500 years of the bible, some of the
old meaning has been lost in translation.
European theatrical conventions also focused
exclusively on an actor’s ability to deliver
lines, and what the lines themselves say.
In the Elizabethan era, it was common to simply
not have a set or props for a given production.
And so, some of you may have noticed that
Shakespeare goes to great lengths to have
his actors describe what a given set looks
like, what the weather is like, how dark it
is. The responsibility of the actors was not
to show this via acting, but telling via dialogue.
They couldn’t really afford to “show don’t
tell” until film came along.
Compare and contrast to a Japanese performance
art like Kabuki… which has markedly less
dialogue and which the audience is more encouraged
to read into how a given performer is carrying
themselves, their gestures, their expressions.
How they move. Why they move. A single look
can mean as much as, or more than, a Shakespearean
sonnet.
That’s why a lot of Western audiences really
don’t get why people love ballet and fashion.
That’s ALL show and no tell. In both of
those cases — they are not seen as ‘accessable’
because most people have not developed the
sensibilities needed to analyze how well a
given balerina is pretending to be a swan.
So yes, among Western audiences there is an
expectation that media will hold their hand
and guide them through every element of the
plot. Thought process being ‘if the creator
wants me to know about something in their
media, they will tell me that it is important.’
Hitchcock famously got around this by SHOWING
you something important three times, but not
necessarily talking about it even once. That
way it’s hard to miss but he’s not spilling
the whole mystery for the viewers who are
actually paying attention.
Conversely, the argument for nuance goes:
‘if the creator has something important
to say in this media, they will reward me
by letting me figure it out for myself.’
Basically the golden rule of David Lynch.
Which way is better? Depends on the storyteller,
the story, and the audience.
There’s actually been a centuries-long debate
within art criticism. Do we, as art critics,
observe the work as it was intended, only
factoring in the cultural attitudes that the
author was deliberately feeding into their
art. Or do we analyze in spite of the author’s
intentions, factoring other iconographic connections
that the author was not necessarily intending,
but that enriches the work nevertheless.
Many authors, in biographies and interviews
will often speak to assumptions of their work:
symbolic value, allegory, allusion — and
oftentimes they admit that what is being read
into their work was never intended. For instance,
after being consistently questioned on the
feminist power of Carrie, Stephen King admitted
that he had never intended for it to be viewed
under such a feminist lens.
Instead, he said that after reading his first
draft, he noticed a reoccurring pattern of
blood. And in subsequent drafts, highlighted
these elements further. The result was a story
which, under a certain interpretation, spoke
to a way that women find power because of
and in spite of suffering.
Does King’s lack of deliberate intention
diminish the art or the artist?
I would argue: no. The ability for an artist
to focus on developing a good story, while
subliminally including elements that speak
to a culture at large is an outstanding talent.
And sadly, many who have this talent are often
plagued with lifelong inadequacy issues, imposter
complexes, and frequently opt to give up before
they hit their stride because others hold
them up against artists who appear to do it
all seamlessly… Those who, also, would have
openly admitted to not having the slightest
clue what they’re doing, but happen to do
the right thing so nobody bothers to ask.
And in this respect, Yuri!!! On ICE exists
as a triumph of gay representation. Before
it set out to do anything, it was going to
tell a good story. Where most stories function
around telling people how to succeed, Yuri!!!
On ICE was primarily about how not to give
up.
Really, the nail in the coffin should have
been the direct message from the creator.
“Yuri and Victor are gay, and in a relationship.”
She said that—
So that really should be the end of it. We’re
not gonna do anything else to talk about why
Victor and Yuri are queer. It’s a thing.
Be mad.
But… Japan has certain laws, such as what
time of night a queer-centric show can be
aired on TV. This show was slated for an earlier
timeslot in the night because its first a
foremost a sports anime. In order for the
quiet part to be as loud as the creator wanted,
it would have have to air much later at night
than the network wanted. Probably not reach
as wide an audience because of it, and definitely
not have the same amount of advertising behind
it.
What the creator did with presenting an obviously
gay story while still appeasing the censorship
regulations was… just an all round masterclass
in network trolling. She had a gay thing that
was, more or less approved for all ages—
—And wanted to project it out to as large
an audience as possible, while still preserving
the queer elements of the story. So, she had
to compromise her artistic vision, appease
the network demands, and develop a quality
program that would appeal to audiences.
The easiest thing to do in this situation
would be to develop a token straight love
interest for Yuri and/or Victor. That way,
with heterosexuality confirmed, the creator
would have a lot more leeway from the studio
to do what she wanted. But instead, and I
strongly approve of this, she coded elements
of queerness so strongly that they are absolutely
unmissable, and yet, she can argue to the
network that it matches the straight-leaning
sensibility of network standards.
I don’t know how much you know about show
business but being able to do that without
sacrificing the integrity of the project is
absolutely incredible. As a comparison of
how things can go terribly wrong, Nickelodeon
fought tooth and nail against the creative
team of Legend of Korra, who wanted to present
a queer woman of colour. Which were, at the
time, three words that the network did not
want to hear in a pitch.
Unfortunately, for whatever reason, there
was little effort made to code Korra as ‘queer’
— maybe it was even a studio note to force
Korra into a number of Love triangles with
other men, and a continuing on-again-off-again
relationship with a male supporting character.
Eventually going so far as to push the final
seasons of the show onto their web only platform
because they knew Korra and Asami were going
to hold hands in the final shot and, well,
we can’t put that on TV, now can we?
And that isn’t to say that Yuri!!! On ICE
did not suffer it’s own managerial problems.
There were insane deadlines on the animation
department so the skating scenes suffer from
some painful frame drops, the script for each
episode was roughly twice as long as the network
permitted, so a lot of character development
for smaller characters had to be dropped.
And it very well may be that the more explicit
gay content had to be cut for time constrains
as well as network appeasement.
And yet, the creative team very masterfully
used the time resources they had to advance
the already-constricted plot at the same time
as dropping some gay bombs. And, maybe even
as a happy accident, used nuance to their
advantage to make queer content that benefitted
from having no explicit discussion of homosexuality.
Because Yuri!!! On ICE is not about queerness.
It’s about queer people, but it’s not
about qualifying the validity of their personhood
based on their capacity for queerness. Their
queerness is neither the first nor the second
thing that comes to mind when discussing their
roles in the plot, and the roles they have
to other characters.
This includes the relationship between Victor
and Yuri.
And this isn’t to say you aren’t meant
to see the queerness, nor that this story
is not meant to be seen as a love story. But
it is meant to say that the characters have
a purpose beyond letting the audience know
that they’re here and they’re queer. Because,
speaking from my experiences as a gay person,
I can safely say that ‘being gay’ is not
what’s on my mind most of the time. I don’t
feel the need to qualify my gayness either
to a partner, family or the rest of society.
In the same way, Yuri and Victor do not need
to have an exchange that goes along the lines
of:
“But… I’m a boy like you! W-why are
you holding my hand!?!”
“Ever since I was young… I knew I was
different… and I was drawn to you because…
you’re also different — like I saw in
myself years ago!”
They know they’re gay. They don’t need
to have a heart-to-heart about it because
that does not benefit them, as characters.
Doing so is only to benefit an audience and
would, as a result, break the emotional realism
of the scene.
And in doing so this speaks to a queer experience
that is much more realistic, and identifiable.
And so, by keeping the queerness coded — ironically
— this moves closer into an experience that
is intended to be appreciated by queer people.
Rather than presenting a queer experience
for the intention of being consumed by straight
people.
In fact, the lack of clarity also affords
a, perhaps accidental instance of nonbinary
representation, specifically from Yuri. As
per elements of the show, he is much more
comfortable skating his programs as a woman.
He spares no expense to clarify that he feels
like he doesn’t belong with the other men,
and any time the word ‘man’ is used in
the entirety of the show, it is always in
a period of great anxiety for Yuri himself.
Victor also started out his career looking
very androgynous, bending the separation between
male and female, if not shattering it.
So at this point I ask myself — what is
the difference between representation, coding,
pandering, and baiting? And is drawing a distinction
necessary? After all, it would be unfair to
act like Yuri on Ice is the only piece of
media ever produced to have subtle queer representation.
The problem is that in most other cases, the
representation isn't so much subtle as it
is simply not acknowledged. It would be easy
to just drop my series of queer baiting videos
right here, but there’s been a few movies
that have come out since then that I’d rather
talk about. We’ll drop them into two categories.
Queer representation, and Queer Pandering.
See if you can tell which is which.
Disney’s Cruella.
I wasn’t sure what to expect from Cruella,
to be honest. Disney was already trumpeting
it as their “First Out Gay Character”,
the third or forth such character in the last
few years, so I was preparing myself for a
big ole eye roll. But it never came.
The gay character in question, Arty, a fashionista
who helps Cruella create her devilish looks
throughout the film, didn’t silently pine
over any of the male characters, wasn’t
abused for his queerness, and didn’t exist
just to give Cruella someone to talk to. He
was active in the plot, helping her create
the looks she would use to bring down her
rival The Baronesse, performs live on stage
at an impromptu Cruella fashion show, and
isn’t just forgotten when the plot moves
past him. In the closing scenes of the film
he’s among Cruella’s crew. Jasper and
Horace are there, of course, but so is Arty.
Meaning he’s probably coming back for the
sequel Disney currently has in development.
Now plenty of queer people have pointed out
that it’s never stated in that he is in
fact gay, which is true. But he’s pure camp,
with his Bowie inspired looks, and even talks
about being beaten up for being different.
He doesn’t say he’s gay, or show romantic
interest in any other characters, but nobody
does. Though Jasper might have a crush on
Cruella, she doesn’t seem to reciprocate,
and it could easily be read a brother/sister
type of situation. Jasper’s heterosexuality
is just as subtle as Arty’s homosexuality.
Cruella, on the other hand, never even gives
a longing look to anything that isn’t fabric.
Leading me to believe that maybe, just maybe,
Cruella might fall onto the ACE spectrum.
Which, if she was still a puppy killer would
be pretty bad ACE representation. But as it
seems she’s reformed her ways from Disney’s
last version of her to this one, she’s less
bad guy and more bad ass.
So the queerness is Cruella is subtle, and
does require the audience to understand at
least a bit of the history of camp and androgyny,
but it’s some of the better queer rep I’ve
seen in a mainstream Hollywood movie, especially
from Disney. I’m sure they’ll eliminate
my current good will once they release that
River Cruise movie though.
Next!
Ah, more Disney.
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.
The live action one.
Now this ones been discussed to death. LeFou,
the gay under our microscope here, is just
bad representation. Firstly, his name literally
means “The Fool”, so hurray us. Secondly,
he pines after the biggest jock in town, whose
an absolute asshole to everyone including
him. As if we never grow out the bad habits
we pick up in grade school. His character
is a villain until he’s suddenly not. When
he suddenly has a change of heart, has a heart
to heart with Mrs Pots about Gaston, and realizes
he deserves a better boyfriend. Or at least
someone better to pine over.
So he ends up dancing with, or at least embracing,
one of the townies we spotted for a split
second earlier in the film. This was Disney’s
“Exclusively gay” moment, by the way.
Something that the films director, out gay
filmmaker Bill Condon, played up in the press
for literally months beforehand. Creating
much controversy from parents groups and much
anticipation from gay fans. After all, Beauty
and the Beast was Howard Ashmen’s swan song
before his untimely death from complications
due to AIDS, so it would be a fitting tribute
to him to finally put a real gay character
in a Disney movie. And then the scene happened
and the audience said… that was it?
Yes, that was it. Like Star Wars The Rise
of Skywalker would do two years later, the
exclusive gay moment was a blink and you miss
it shot, not SCENE, a shot.
But enough about Disney. I don’t expect
anything wonderfully gay to come from the
Mouse House anytime soon. And no, a sexless
married gay superhero with kids in a minor
supporting role in The Eternals does not count.
I said good representation, not boring representation.
So let’s talk about some real gay super
heroes.
THE OLD GUARD
The Old Guard was a 2020 Netflix action movie
about a group of functionally immortal bad
asses. They think they’re the last of their
kind but when a new one pops up, seemingly
out of nowhere, it leads to a race against
time to keep her safe from a conniving capitalist
swine.
Two of the aforementioned immortal badasses
are a gay couple. Joe and Nicky. Characters
whose sexuality is so subtle at first its
literally in the background, out of focus.
Early on in the film you’re not even likely
to notice the knowing looks they give each
other, or even notice them spooning in the
back of a scene. But then BAM, they’re kidnapped
and their lives are seemingly in danger so
they declare their literally undying love
for one another. And goddammit it works. This
crazy, over the top action movie that would
make some of the Fast and Furious movies look
subtle has, hands down, the best gay representation
I’ve ever seen in a Hollywood movie. The
gays don’t die. They’re not depressed
about being gay. Nobody wants to kill them
for being gay. It’s just… a thing they
are. Something that has, really, nothing to
do with the plot. They could have been straight
buds but, instead, they’re gay. They just
happen to be gay. And it is perfect. Unlike
most gay characters they survive to the end
and will be in the sequel, which Netflix green-lit
earlier this year. The movie was a huge success
for Netflix and other than gay media, almost
nobody mentioned Joe and Nicky. Why? Because
Netflix didn’t put out a press release declaring
“WE HAVE A GAY! TWO OF EM!”
They just let the gays exist like they would
any straight character. They were just there.
Their queerness completely incidental to the
plot, just like every other characters straightness.
I was so shocked by this that I barely knew
what to think when I watched it. An action
movie with gay characters. An action movie
with gay heroes? An action movie with gay
heroes who don’t die?
WHAT IS THIS? Opposite land?! Did the pandemic
cause a new reality to open up?
Sadly, no. No new reality, just a single ripple
in spacetime that felt a bit different. Not
a whole lot of incidentally gay characters
popping up in action movies since then. But
one did come out just before it:
The Birds of Prey and the Fabulous Emancipation
of one Harley Quinn
DC and Warner Bros managed to make a good
movie and then cancelled the sequel. Color
me surprised.
This rollercoaster of colorful sets, audacious
costumes, bonkers action, and off the cuff
queer references (Harley is confirmed to have
dated women even before the opening title)
was the last movie I saw in theatres before
the pandemic hit. And it was a hell of a ride
to go out on.
Now, as a movie news nerd I followed the production
of Birds of Prey pretty closely. So I knew
that WB actually sent this thing back for
reshoots at least once because they decided,
late in the game, that a certain plot point
was a bit too risque for them. You see, originally,
Ewan McGregor’s Black Mask was 100% confirmed
to be gay in the movie, and the reason he
was after the Bertinelli diamond wasn’t
for the money, but because it contained data
inside. Data that, when read, would reveal
him in compromised positions. And his dick
pics.
I’m not kidding.
Black Mask, or Roman Sianos, was a bit of
a kinky bottom you see. And heaven help the
woman who let that info leak out to the rest
of Gotham’s underworld.
But WB got cold feet and called for reshoots.
Simplifying the plot and vaguely straight
washing Roman and his serial killing henchman
/ dom top, Victor Zazz. Oh the movie we could
have had if it weren’t for corporate meddling.
But the queerness of the couple is still abundantly
clear. Roman never says he’s queer but when
he’s rocking a pink silk kimono while dancing
around with a martini, I don’t think it
needs be remarked.
Ewan McGregor's acting has a campy quality
to it that reminds me of villain in a John
Waters movie. Now, the queer community doesn’t
really like queer coded villains these days,
which is pretty understandable. But in this
case, exceptions can and should be made.
Some of the Birds of Prey media discussion
was focused on how the film despises men or
portrays white men as villains. That isn't
entirely accurate, but the film does have
a slew of terrible men with a similar appearance.
What interests me about this is that Roman
and Victor are examples of these evil men.
They aren't macho clichés of men, and they
don't sexualize the female characters in the
film. Roman shifting into the Black Mask persona
and forcing a woman to pull off her clothing
is one example where it doesn't feel like
he's doing it for the sexual thrills, but
for the control. He also didn't want the dress
in his club because it was a crime against
fashion. And unlike murder, some laws should
never be broken. (but fashion has changed
- no it hasnt - serial mom clip)
So is Black Mask GOOD representation of queer
men? No, of course not. But is he an interesting
character with more going for him than just
being the gay character. Yes. And that’s
what we need. We need characters who are MORE
than just the gay one.
This puts me in a difficult situation, as
it may not be clear what I’m advocating
for. On one hand, I’m praising various instances
of subtlety in media when it comes to queer
representation, while condemning other attempts
to make more ‘overtly’ queer media. But
what I’m saying is that we don’t necessarily
need to chose between one or the other.
Our representation would get boring if we,
as a group, decided that there was only one
way to represent us. In that case, it would
be a gross disservice to the vast range of
diversity in the queer experience. There isn’t
one way to be queer — there isn’t even
one way to be gay. But my problem with ‘explicit’
representation in modern media is that you
wouldn’t know that from the way we are represented.
Maybe in thise case, it’s best to focus
less on depicting queer instances—
—and instead place that focus on depicting
queer experiences.
Making sure we push queer characters into
fiction doesn’t seem to be having the desired
effect of having our people and communities
seen. As the end result is a matter of taking
queer characters and making their motives
and backgrounds indistinguishable from straight
characters. Reminiscent of saying we deserve
gay marriage because we’re ‘just like’
heterosexual couples. We aren’t. We have
different social experiences with society
at large.
Our coming-of-age experiences, as they fit
outside the projected norm, are not the norm.
And depicting queer characters as being ‘straight
characters but gay’ is a disservice to the
way that the process of self-discovery and
independence shapes us.
We’re NOT like everyone else. And that’s
what we should be proud of. We’re not even
always like each other — and it should be
our diversity that society at large values
as our most significant strength.
Not our ability to buy a house in the suburbs
in a prestigious school district.
Because while we’re busy showing how much
gay people are ‘just like’ straight people,
We’re forgetting about the boss-ass bitch
queers who have only ever found acceptance
by being better than literally everyone else.
So much so that they can’t find where their
performance ends and they begin.
The angry queers who feel like they’re only
worth something if they’re validated by
the established order, instead of finding
worth in themselves.
And the personal improvement queers who struggle
to figure out what it is they have to offer
the world.
Our stories, our experiences, our lives are
interesting and relevant. And if you tell
an interesting story about a queer person,
audiences will cheer for them.
Which is what made me love this show. It represents
the queer community, specifically queer men,
in a way that I very rarely see. And that
being... that there are many different types
of queer people.
Insecure ones like Yuri. Perfectionists like
Victor. People who want to be center stage,
and people who just want to blend in. Those
of us who are comfortable in our skin, and
those who are still working on things. Masculine
or Feminine. Supportive or Competitive. Tender
or painfully horny. We come in many different
shapes and sizes. Skin colors, religious backgrounds,
nationalities, and beliefs.
But at our best, like the skaters in Yuri
on Ice, we are, at the end of the day, a community.
There to help one another, and push each other
when we need it. So anytime you feel small
or lost or ignored… like you’re not good
enough. Like you don’t fit in. Think about
the queer people who came before us. The artists.
The politicians. The power brokers. The creators.
The writers. The teachers. The brothers and
sisters. The good friends. Who changed things,
who told stories, who made an impact.
Because they’re important. We’re important,
we’re significant, and we were born to make
history.